dã³ing well in your courses a guide by andrej karpathy here is some advice i would give to younger students if they wish to do well in their undergraduate courses. having been tested for many years of my life (with pretty good results), here are some rules of thumb that i feel helped me: general all-nighters are not worth it. sleep does wonders. optimal sleep time for me is around 7.5 hours, with an absolute minimum of around 4hrs. it has happened to me several times that i was stuck on some problem for an hour in the night, but was able to solve it in 5 minutes in the morning. i feel like the brain commits a lot of shaky short-term memories to stable long-term memories during the night. i try to start studying for any big tests well in advance (several days), even if for short periods of time, to maximize the number of nights that my brain gets for the material. attend tutorials or review sessions.even if they are bad. the fact that they get you to think about the material is what counts. if its too boring, you can always work on something else. remember that you can also try to attend a different tutorial with a different ta. tests: preparation considering the big picture and organisation is the key.create schedule of study, even if you dont stick to it. for me this usually involves getting an idea of everything i need to know and explicitly writing it down in terms of bullet points. consider all points carefully and think about how long it will take you to get them down. if you dont do this, there is a tendency to spend too much time on beginning of material and then skim through the (most important) later material due to lack of time. always try to look at previous tests before starting to study.especially if the past tests were written by the same professor. this will give you strong hints about how you should study. every professor has a different evaluation style. dont actually attempt to complete the questions in the beginning, but take careful note of the type of questions. reading and understanding is not the same as replicating the content.even i often make this mistake still: you read a formula/derivation/proof in the book and it makes perfect sense. now close the book and try to write it down. you will find that this process is completely different and it will amaze you that many times you wont actually be able to do this! somehow the two things use different parts of the memory. make it a point to make sure that you can actually write down the most important bits, and that you can re-derive them at will. feynman famously knew this very well. always try to collaborate with others, but near the end.study alone first because in the rly stages of studying others can only serve as a distraction. but near the end get together with others: they will often point out important pitfalls, bring up good issues, and sometimes give you an opportunity to teach. which brings me to: dont only hang out only with stronger students. weaker students will have you explain things to them and you will find that teaching the material helps a lot with understanding. go to the prof before final exam at least once for office hours.